Isabel Schnabel: The monetary policy non-puzzle in bond markets
Speech by Ms Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Bond Market Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 15 September 2021.
* * *
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Sovereign bond markets in the euro area and the United States have taken a remarkable turn
over the summer. 1 Despite the ongoing strong recovery from the crisis, the revival of inflation
and surveys signalling firming expectations among market participants that central bank asset
purchases globally may gradually slow in the near future, sovereign bond yields have declined
and partly reversed the upward trend observed in the beginning of the year.
In my remarks today I will discuss the drivers of recent bond market developments and zoom in
on two factors that may currently pull yields lower: one relates to concerns regarding the spread
of the Delta variant, the other is monetary policy. While the first factor may be puzzling, the
second is less so.

Real (not nominal) interest rates are the puzzle
At the start of the year, sovereign yield curves across advanced economies steepened visibly. A
decline in new coronavirus (COVID-19) infections, a rising share of the population being
vaccinated and prospects of large fiscal stimulus programmes on both sides of the Atlantic
boosted risk sentiment and supported a reflation trade that put upward pressure on long-term
nominal bond yields (left-hand chart, Slide 2).
Starting in early June, however, long-term yields took a remarkable turn to the downside in the
United States and in the euro area. By early August, euro area GDP-weighted 10-year yields
were again trading in negative territory, and 10-year US Treasury yields fell by 40 basis points
over the same period.
Since then, low yields have frequently been tested by better-than-expected macroeconomic data,
or by inflation prints that challenged the “transitory” hypothesis. Yields occasionally spiked
upwards and today remain above the lows we saw in August. But there still seems to be a deep
gravitational pull that is keeping long-term yields from rising to anywhere close to the levels seen
during the last recovery in 2017-18, or even to the levels seen earlier this year.
In the euro area, exceptionally low interest rates extend across the entire currency union (righthand chart, Slide 2). Sovereign spreads over German Bunds remain below or close to post-2008
lows, suggesting that common factors related to risk-free rates are currently dominating
conditions in sovereign bond markets.
A closer inspection of these risk-free rates in the euro area exposes a dichotomy in the way
investors are charting the path to recovery from the crisis. Since the beginning of the year,
nominal overnight index swap (OIS) rates have been pulled in opposite directions by two
competing forces (left-hand chart, Slide 3).
On the one hand, market-based measures of inflation compensation have persistently put
upward pressure on nominal rates, as one would expect to see at this stage of the economic
cycle. Based on the developments in inflation compensation alone, nominal 10-year OIS yields in
the euro area would be more than 70 basis points above the level prevailing at the beginning of
the year.
5-year, 5-year forward inflation swap rates have also risen well above pre-pandemic levels (right1/5

BIS central bankers' speeches

hand chart, Slide 3) and recently reached their highest level in more than four years. As such,
market-based inflation expectations seem to suggest that investors see the recovery from the
crisis as an opportunity to escape the low inflation environment that has dominated the
macroeconomic landscape for many years.
But the measurable parallel decline in real interest rates has offset a large part of the rise in
nominal yields that would have resulted from higher inflation expectations. The real 10-year OIS
rate in the euro area fell to yet another record low over the summer (Slide 4). At close to -1.9%, it
now stands at an exceptional distance from its average since the outbreak of the global financial
crisis. The real 10-year rate in the United States is somewhat higher but has also declined visibly
over the course of the year.
The behaviour of real yields has puzzled many market participants. In a recovery, real long-term
yields would typically recover from the lows of the crisis and rise back to levels that are broadly
consistent with the (new) real growth potential of the economy.
Given the unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy response to this crisis, large public
infrastructure programmes on both sides of the Atlantic and a strong push to accelerate the
transition towards a greener and more digital economy, it might be expected that real interest
rates would be higher, not lower, following the pandemic.
The absence of such an upward move, at least so far, may therefore either imply that investors
have succumbed to the idea of secular stagnation, and hence revised down the future expected
path of short-term interest rates, or, alternatively, that other factors are holding yields down.

The Delta puzzle
The factors that may explain current bond market conditions remain the subject of intense
market speculation. I would like to focus on two such factors pointing in different directions as to
whether current yield levels constitute a puzzle or not.
The first relates to the possibility that the market may be overestimating the risks to the global
growth outlook from the spread of the more contagious Delta variant.
Our analysis shows that, in the United States, adverse macroeconomic shocks – in all likelihood
related to COVID-19 – have systematically suppressed long-term interest rates since about May
(left-hand chart, Slide 5). To some extent, this seems surprising.
There is no doubt that the Delta variant has started affecting mobility and business conditions in
contact-intensive services industries in some regions, especially in the United States. It is also
likely that the Delta variant is aggravating and prolonging supply bottlenecks (right-hand chart,
Slide 5), also because vaccination rates in emerging economies remain low. All in all, the Delta
variant has many characteristics of a genuine supply-side shock, raising prices and lowering
output.
But market analysts’ growth expectations suggest that this shock is widely perceived as being
short-lived. For example, Consensus Economics’ expectations for real GDP growth in 2022 have
remained unscathed by the renewed surge in infection rates, both in the euro area and the United
States (left-hand chart, Slide 6). These expectations have continued to increase and have settled
at levels well above estimated potential growth rates.
A recent survey among European fund managers showed that only 3% of investors consider
COVID-19 as a significant risk to the growth outlook.2 High and rising vaccination rates in
advanced economies are expected to make growth increasingly immune to economically painful
stop-and-go disruptions.

2/5

BIS central bankers' speeches

Similarly, credit rating upgrades have recently outpaced downgrades by a substantial margin on
both sides of the Atlantic (right-hand chart, Slide 6). In Europe, the pace of upgrades has even
accelerated compared with the second quarter.
The Delta explanation becomes even more of a puzzle when considering recent developments in
stock markets, which have continued their undeterred rally over the summer (left-hand chart,
Slide 7). Today, the Euro Stoxx is some 15% above its pre-pandemic level. The Standard &
Poor’s 500 index currently stands almost 40% above its pre-pandemic level.
Low and declining discount rates have supported stock prices over time. Yet, a simple dividend
discount model suggests that revisions to longer-term earnings expectations explain most of the
rise in valuations since the middle of the year – that is, over the period where bond yields
declined (right-hand chart, Slide 7). In the United States, earnings expectations are well above
pre-pandemic levels. In the euro area, they recently surpassed their pre-pandemic level.
In other words, to the extent that lower real yields actually reflect growth concerns, they would
point to a decoupling between sovereign bond market pricing on the one hand and stock markets’
and analysts’ growth expectations on the other.

The monetary policy non-puzzle
The second factor that may explain current bond market conditions relates to monetary policy.
There are two ways in which monetary policy may help explain current bond yields.
The first is through the persistent effects of asset purchases. The ECB, the Federal Reserve
System and other major central banks have acquired a substantial amount of assets during the
crisis. The ECB, for its part, has bought assets worth more than €1.3 trillion under the pandemic
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) alone since March last year, or nearly 12% of last
year’s euro area GDP, resulting in a visible decline in the euro area bond free float (left-hand
chart, Slide 8).
The stock of acquired assets together with current and prospective reinvestments already
provides substantial policy accommodation. ECB simulations show that our joint asset purchase
programme (APP) and PEPP holdings can be expected to put sizeable downward pressure on
interest rates across the maturity spectrum even in three to five years’ time (right-hand chart,
Slide 8).3
Having these effects in mind, it may be less surprising that real rates on both sides of the Atlantic
have so far resisted broad upward pressure despite firming expectations that the pace of net
asset purchases globally will gradually be reduced in the near future.
The second way in which monetary policy may help explain current low yields is through a
perceived change in the reaction functions of central banks, largely reflecting recent adjustments
to strategic frameworks.
And, indeed, an inspection of the correlation patterns between future interest rates and inflation
expectations suggests that the market may have recently reappraised the way central banks will
adjust policy rates, particularly in the euro area (Slide 9). The trend line is much flatter than in the
past – that is, markets expect less monetary policy tightening for each incremental improvement
in the medium-term inflation outlook.
Such correlation patterns do not imply causality. But they do suggest that the market may have
started internalising our new forward guidance, especially regarding the conditions that we need
to see to start raising policy rates.

3/5

BIS central bankers' speeches

First, we want to see inflation reaching 2% well ahead of the end of our projection horizon and we
want it to remain at 2% thereafter. And, second, realised progress in underlying inflation needs to
be sufficiently advanced to be consistent with inflation stabilising at 2% over the medium term.
In other words, given the significant uncertainty surrounding inflation projections many years out,
we want to see clearer signs that inflation is reliably moving towards our 2% target. This will
imply a more patient reaction function, consistent with the previous scatterplot analysis, and
hence may also imply a transitory period in which inflation is moderately above target.
Two additional developments corroborate the view that investors have started internalising our
more patient reaction function.
One relates to the distribution of risks around the future interest rate outlook.
After the announcement of our new strategy and forward guidance, the risk distribution around
the future evolution of the 3-month Euribor has been truncated from the top, meaning that
investors have effectively priced out contingencies that foreshadow a very steep increase in
policy rates (Slide 10). Such expectations are consistent with our new September ECB staff
projections, which show that inflation is expected to remain below our 2% target in the medium
term.
The second development relates to the distribution of risks around the future inflation outlook.
Since the beginning of the year, the balance of risks priced in by investors has noticeably shifted
to the upside. Option prices, for example, currently suggest that, in the United States, the market
attaches a probability of around 80% that inflation over the next five years will, on average, be
above the Federal Reserve’s 2% aim (left-hand chart, Slide 11).4 In the euro area, the priced-in
probabilities are smaller but have also increased visibly to nearly 40%.
This is also increasingly reflected in the euro area bond market. The compensation that investors
demand for uncertainty around the future inflation outlook – the inflation risk premium – has
increased measurably since the start of the year, albeit from very depressed levels (right-hand
chart, Slide 11).
Yet, despite growing upside risks, the sensitivity of rate expectations to changes in the inflation
outlook has not changed. This suggests that investors have understood that higher inflation
prospects will need to visibly migrate to the baseline scenario and be reflected in actual
underlying inflation dynamics before they warrant a more fundamental reassessment of the
medium-term inflation outlook, and hence the future course of monetary policy.

Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Sovereign bond yields are at exceptionally low levels. Record low real interest rates provide
substantial policy accommodation, supporting the recovery and paving the way for inflation to
reach our 2% target in the medium term. It is likely that the stock of acquired assets as well as
our new forward guidance are contributing to keeping real yields anchored at low levels.
Consequently, current low real yields may be less puzzling than they may appear at first sight.
As the economy returns to full strength and underlying price pressures build durably and visibly,
market-based interest rates can be expected to increase in line with the state-contingent nature
of our forward guidance. The conditions that we have laid out for raising interest rates ensure that
this adjustment will not happen prematurely but only once we are confident that inflation will
converge to our 2% target in the medium term.

4/5

BIS central bankers' speeches

Thank you.

1 I would like to thank Johannes Gräb for his contributions to this speech.
2 Bank of America Global Research (2021), European fund manager survey, 14 September.
3 These simulations assume future purchases corresponding to the median response from our survey of

monetary analysts (SMA).
4 Options are based on consumer price index (CPI) inflation, but the Federal Reserve System states its goal for

inflation in terms of the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) price index.

5/5

BIS central bankers' speeches

